[![General Assembly Logo](https://camo.githubusercontent.com/1a91b05b8f4d44b5bbfb83abac2b0996d8e26c92/687474703a2f2f692e696d6775722e636f6d2f6b6538555354712e706e67)](https://generalassemb.ly/education/web-development-immersive)

# Hackathon

Now that you're each respective experts in a new topic of your choice (thanks,
[Conference](https://github.com/ga-wdi-boston/conference)!), let's take some
new knowledge and incorporate it into a web application of your choice.

In true Hackathon fashion, you'll have approximately 24 hours to work on these
projects.

You may work in groups or individually. The goal is simply to have a deployed
 solution to one of the issues listed below.

You may work off of any of our client or API templates, listed below in
Additional Resources.

We will **not** be grading these projects, however, you may request a
Consultant's review during an upcoming 1:1.

## Tips

-   Prototype first, add functionality second!
-   Make sure your solution to the issue you chose to work on is clearly
presented.
-   The same issue can be chosen by multiple groups/individuals.

## Issues to Select From

### Elderly Travel

Our client, TravelBuzz, has noticed a drastic decline in travel from their
elderly demographic. Travel agencies are as rare as phone booths, and those
fan-dangled computer machines are too clicky and clacky to spend too much time
on. Traditional travel-booking sites are too complicated to navigate. How can
we make travel bookings more accessible to this demographic?

### Cats on Cats on Web

We know cats dominate the internet. There's no denying that. Why haven't they
figured out a way to socialize online, yet? Since humans have paved the way in
social networking, let's go one step further and lend a hand to our feline
friends. How can we give cats a space online to connect, chat and do whatever
other social things they may need to do?

### Too Many Selfies

Selfies. Everywhere I look, there are selfies. Selfies at the bar, selfies on
the train, selfies in front of me at a concert because they want to show their
friends how unenthused I am about their selfies. How can we make selfies
unappealing to the youth? Negative and positive reinforcement sound like a
great start. Leverage a facial recognition API to somehow negatively reward
image uploads including faces and positively reward images that don't.
Remember, these are mainly millenials we're targeting, so make it enticing!

## Deliverables

-   A deployed web application demonstrating a creative&trade; solution to an
issue listed above.
-   Use of a third party API, library, or knowledge base integration not
taught by a WDI Consultant

## Additional Resources

-   [JS Template](https://github.com/ga-wdi-boston/js-template)
-   [Express API Template](https://github.com/ga-wdi-boston/express-api-template)
-   [Rails API Template](https://github.com/ga-wdi-boston/rails-api-template)

## [License](LICENSE)

Source code distributed under the MIT license. Text and other assets copyright
General Assembly, Inc., all rights reserved.
