![General Assembly Logo](https://camo.githubusercontent.com/1a91b05b8f4d44b5bbfb83abac2b0996d8e26c92/687474703a2f2f692e696d6775722e636f6d2f6b6538555354712e706e67)

Example Group Project Roles
===========================

All of you will be responsible for building this project together, and you
should expect to spend a significant amount of time working on every part of the
app: planning, back-end and front-end.

This means that in a group of three or four members, the group *should not* work
on more than two tasks at a given time. You are *expected to pair*. Your job is
not to produce code, but to produce a product! Even if a pair member on a
front-end task doesn't feel able to contribute to code, they will contribute to
code quality and idea generation.

However, in addition to your shared responsibility to deliver the finished
product, you may also each have accountability roles. Assuming these roles and
responsibilities are *optional* and the assignment of roles is up to your group.
A different division of accountability may work better for you. The suggested
roles and duties are:

- **Project Lead/Product Lead:** Accountable for team meetings, team progress,
  and time management. Also accountable for team decisions on product features,
  scope, and timeline.

- **Front-End Lead:** Accountable for team decisions on front-end implementation
  strategy and front-end dependencies and tools. Also accountable for front-end
  execution.

- **Back-End Lead:** Accountable for team decisions on back-end implementation
  strategy and back-end dependencies and tools. Also accountable for back-end
  execution.

- **Quality Assurance:** Accountable for code quality through frequent
  pair-programming and code review. Also accountable for proper use of Git
  (commit messages, branching/merging strategies) throughout the project. If
  your group only has three members, everyone is jointly and individually
  accountable for quality.

To be absolutely clear, this does not mean that the person assigned the back-end
role will be performing all of the tasks on the back-end, and never look at CSS
or JavaScript. Rather, this person is the tie-breaker for decisions about how
the back-end will be implemented (perhaps by other group members), and
accountable for ensuring that the work that is performed is done well, even if
that member is not doing the work themselves.

For example, if Tom, Jason, and Anna were working in a group and Anna was the
back-end lead: Tom and Jason might be trying to figure out the best way to
implement a set of model associations and can’t come to a decision, they go to
Anna and she will talk to each and help make the decision for which type of
association will be used. It is entirely possible that Anna doesn’t actually do
the coding for that feature at all.

In another example, Jeff, Matt, and David are working in a group and David is
the project-lead: David proposes that the team uses Asana, Jeff proposes
Basecamp, and Matt doesn’t really seem to care. David talks to Jeff about it to
find out why he prefers it. David then agrees they will use Basecamp despite not
proposing it himself.

In a third example, Jeff, Matt and David are working in a group and Matt is the
back-end lead: Jeff has been working on some RSpec tests and their
implementation for some models in Rails to fulfill a feature. Matt notices that
the RSpec tests leave a lot of holes and there are some weird variable names
being used in the implementation. While things work, they could be done better.
Matt helps Jeff by doing a code review with him and then pairs to refactor some
of the test and model implementations. Now Matt feels like the back-end is back
on track for success for the next steps in the project.

In an alternate universe to our third example, Matt notices that RSpec tests
leave a lot of holes, and instead of doing a code review and sitting with Jeff
to help make the code base better, Matt decides he is going to write his own
tests, and completely ignores Jeff's contributions. This is refered to as
'railroading', and is **completely** unacceptable behavior on a team. Matt's
behavior would be grounds for him not meeting expectations.

These roles aren’t your jobs in the group; rather they are simply something you
are more mindful of and accountable for while you work as a team to build a
great project.
